The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz and David Carson.
The topic for this show will be the writers of hard science fiction and we will also have an
interview with science fiction author, Hal Clement.
Science, of course, is at the core of science fiction. It's the main point of distinction from
fantasy and other forms of imaginative literature. There have always been science fiction authors
who include science and technology in their stories, of course, but there's only a handful of
writers who demand that a science fiction story have a solid, significant, and accurate scientific
base. These authors form a group writing what many readers call hard science fiction.
Now, hard science fiction is an ambiguous term, but I don't think it's yet been replaced with
anything more useful. We might try to define what we mean precisely by hard science fiction. A lot
of stories deal in psychology or social structures, something like this, whereas a hard science
story, hard science fiction story, would deal basically with the basic sciences first. I think
it would have to deal in astronomy, chemistry, biology, physics, astrophysics, the motion of
planets and stars, and things like this as a base for the story to be built upon.
Yeah, I think a hard science story has to be more than just a gimmick story, where there's some
kind of minor extrapolation or some new weapon or some minor thing that would form the basis of
the story. It has to be the important of the plot. It has to be integral to what's happening in the
story, I think, for it to count as a hard science fiction story. And of course, when you look back
on the history of science fiction, we still have some authors today working who would be, I guess,
from the Golden Age of science fiction writers who have strong scientific backgrounds, Arthur C.
Clark, for instance, Paul Anderson, Isaac Asimov. All of them either have degrees in science or are
highly trained in science. You mentioned Arthur C. Clark. We might note his novels, Fountains of
Paradise, in which he had a geosynchronous satellite connected to the Earth, and rendezvous with
Rama, which deals with an artificial world. Yes, and both Paul Anderson and Isaac Asimov both have
stories which have a good hard science background to them. Asimov, having a degree in biochemistry,
and Anderson having a background in engineering, they both have a rather good scientific background
to build hard science fiction stories around. And then beginning in the early 60s and through most
of that decade, there was a new influence in science fiction, what many critics call the new wave.
And the soft sciences became important at that time, psychology, sociology, things of that sort.
And the emphasis in science fiction came to be placed on character, on character development,
social development, and so forth. In fact, a noted Australian critic of science fiction, George
Turner recently stated this. He said that Clement's mission of gravity may survive on sheer elegance
of conception, but that the scientific expertise required for such work limits proliferation.
The interest of the hard science novel is mainly intellectual, and the form probably
represents a dead end, even though it still survives. And it seems to be surviving rather well. We
have some new authors who have come into the science fiction field, who are writing very good hard
science stories, and they have a good background in science, and they seem to write very intelligent
work, very interesting stories. It would seem like Mr. Turner's quote really is not true, it's just
not coming true. In fact, some of those authors have been winning Hugo's and Nebula's. Joe Halliman
comes to mind. He has a BA in physics and astronomy. He's done postgraduate work in mathematics,
computer science, statistics. He's edited the magazine, Astronomy, and has won both the Hugo
and Nebula for his work, The Forever War, which was based on a very hard scientific concept.
Dr. Jerry Pernell, who has a degree in engineering. He's worked on space research projects. He's
worked on both the Mercury and Apollo projects. He's writing science articles as well as science
fiction. In fact, it's been noted that he writes on the same level as Carl Sagan and Isaac Asimov when
it comes to relating scientific concepts to the layman so that he can understand some of the more
intricate interplays in some of the various scientific fields.
Yeah, that's interesting. A lot of these new writers, such as Pornell and so forth,
as Asimov has done, they write science columns for magazines and science fiction books and so
forth, which indicates their interest in that subject. We should also mention John Barley,
a very highly considered science fiction writer who's only, he's written three novels so far,
a number of short stories, but he was trained in physics and in such a novel as Titan and the
sequel to it, Wizards. That training in physics is very evident as he sets up an artificial world
similar to a Dyson sphere and makes it work scientifically, very accurately.
Another person would be James Hogan. All of his novels are extremely scientific.
The one that comes to mind is The Two Faces of Tomorrow with a computer that's very, very believable
because it's so logical and just an extrapolation of what we know now.
Yeah, I like the way in that book too that he'll, in fact, all of his books, he'll get in
all sorts of extrapolation on present technology. For instance, the mass driver he has in that book.
I think that's considered to be possible today. Some of the scientists are looking at.
There are models being built right now that are working mass drivers.
Also, Hogan, we can't neglect his book Thrice Upon a Time. I think it's the only book I can think of
where time travel is made to be, to seem at least, scientifically feasible.
And we certainly need to mention Charles Sheffield. He has a master's in math, a PhD in theoretical
physics, and he's the president of the American Astronautical Society.
Yeah, mostly he's been writing short stories, mostly for analog, but his big novel so far
is The Web Between the Worlds, published a couple of years ago, very highly received by readers.
He's also interested in the L5 Society and space colonies. Some of his work is dealt with the
problems of population on Earth and the possibility that we could build these huge colonies
orbiting the Earth that would allow us to release some of our population pressures.
Probably the most popular of the hard science fiction authors is Hal Clement.
The Science Fiction Radio Show talked with Hal Clement about his work.
You are considered one of the best of the hard science fiction writers.
Why is scientific realism so important in your work?
I'm not sure I'm a good enough psychoanalyst to answer that. I just feel that I have trouble
writing something unless I can more or less convince myself that it might happen. The best
example, I guess, was my attempt a few years ago to write a story for an anthology of vampire tales.
When I had finished it, I discovered that it was a science fiction story.
I counted for everything that happened on a scientific basis, and I wasn't happy about it
until I could account for them that way. Much of your early work was published by John Campbell,
who is noted for his desire for scientific accuracy in the stories he printed.
Did he have much to do with the type of stories that you wrote?
Yes, very certainly it did. John was the one who bought my first several stories.
I knew him quite well, talked to him quite often. Well, I didn't always agree with him. We
both felt that there were rules and that they ought to be followed.
What kind of rules were those?
Well, I mean rules of the universe. We were both materialists, I guess. We felt that the
universe does run by rule, and we felt that a story was most believable when it matched those
rules, at least as we, we meaning humanity in general, currently understood them.
How did you get started writing?
Rather gradually, I was reading the stuff originally and started, I think, with the
Buck Rogers comic strip, and I discovered there were magazines. I began telling the stories that
I'd read in magazines to friends on the great school playground and to boy scouts at campfires.
Then I began correcting some of the errors that I spotted in the stories, and eventually began
trying to write my own. In your novel, Mission of Gravity, it's been noted that you took great
care in designing the world of mescaline. How did you go about designing the world of mescaline?
It was mostly slide rule work. Part of it was my contrary nature. I had read stories in which
planets had extra heavy gravity, stories in which the planets had very light gravity, and
it seemed sort of, of course, there could be no planet with the varying gravity, and I took the,
of course, as a challenge. So I went to work. I am, as I say, a rather firm materialist. I have
serious doubts in things like gravity screens, anti-gravity machines. The only thing I could
think of, which would produce such a variation, was rapid spin. And this was before you could steal
time on computers because they hadn't been invented. I had a good deal of slide rule work, and also
some consultation with such astronomy texts as I could get hold of. And I came up with what seemed
to be a valid planet at the time. There have been errors discovered in it since, I'm afraid.
Does that have reference to the afterward in the book, Mission of Gravity, where you play what
you call the game? Yes. Somebody was playing the game. I believe it was a group of members of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Science Fiction Society. It was for short. And they began
taking Mesquite and Apartheid mathematically. I understand from some of them that the planet
actually should come to a sharp edge at the equator instead of a smooth curve. But I am not a good
enough mathematician myself to check up on this point. One particular point about the Mescalonites,
possibly through my own ignorance, I was never able to tell how they conversed with each other.
They used a vocal language sound. They didn't breathe as we did. I tried to account for their
having vocal apparatus by its developing from a swimming siphon analogous to those of our own
squid. Some people say that your alien psychology is too human, and other people say that you create
a very alien psychology for your aliens. How do you go about developing the psychology for your
aliens? Well, I am not sure, first of all, that an intelligent being's psychology would be all
that different from the human one anyway. It is going to depend on the being's motivation. Presumably,
the creature will be driven so as to survive. He or she or it, or they, if they have several
sexes, are going to have drives to find food, to avoid pain. If they do have sexes, they will
be have drives to use them, exercise them, and all of those will tend to provide motivation
recognizably similar to those of humanity. I have a book that's just come out, The Nitrogen
Fix, in which my alien does not have sex, and I spent a good deal of time trying to find
an alternative drive which would be as powerful. I think I found it, but I'm not going to go into
about here. I'd rather you brought the book and decided for yourself. The planning part
depended on that belief, mostly. I felt that the drives could be at least understood by a human
being. For those people who say that my aliens are noticeably alien, not human in psychology,
I'm afraid I have a rather cynical answer. My secret for making a being seem non-human is to
make him act rationally. For example, I can be fairly specific about this one, in the sequel to
Mission of Gravity, Starlight. At one point I had one of my master knights driving one of these
giant tanks along completely unknown territory, and nothing was happening. He wanted to get
somewhere, and he gradually began going a little faster, and little faster as a human being would do.
Then he suddenly realized what he was doing and slowed down again, which is of course the rational
thing to do. My own suspicion is that nine human beings out of ten would not have slowed down until
they'd run into something. What caused you to write the sequels to both Mission of Gravity and Needle?
In a sense, I was talked into it. I'm very uneasy about sequels and series stories in general. My
experience has been reading them, but I was always disappointed by the later ones. I formed my
opinion of what things were like, and the later stories usually changed those opinions and
disappointed me. The Mission of Gravity sequel came as a result of a conversation I think at one of
the New York conventions, a fan said something, and I can't now remember exactly what it was,
which sounded like a good idea to use the master knights, and I built it up from there. I can be
much more specific about the Needle sequel. There was one particular science fiction fan who was
always asking me when it was going to come out. Every time I met him at a convention, when is the
Needle sequel coming? How? Finally, he changed his tactic. One fine day at a Philadelphia convention,
he walked up to me and said, how? You promised if I stopped smoking, you would write a sequel to
Needle. I've stopped, get at it. Well, I had no recollection of ever making such a deal, but I
couldn't spoil any such success story, so I got to work on it. Not very fast, but I got a little done.
Then I was telling this same story at another convention, I think at Toronto two or three years
later, and Judy Lynn Delray of Delray Books overheard me, and the next thing I knew I had signed a contract.
So he got what he wanted anyway.
There was sort of a tongue-in-cheek style to your short story, The Critical Factor,
where there are beings living in the earth beneath us who are just as unaware of us as we are
unaware of them. What type of psychology and physiology did you develop for creatures that
could flow through solid rock? It was written long enough ago now, so I'm afraid I don't recall all
the details of what led up to it. The idea of having creatures not understanding or not being
aware of others has been part of my basic science fiction frame for a long time, and I think it's
a very likely sort of thing, though I don't like to go into anything as extreme as the fourth dimension.
The idea of something which could soak through rock, well, I have had courses in things like
seismology, although I never specialized in any of the geological sciences. I know a reasonable
amount of chemistry, and this just seemed like a perfectly possible situation to me, and it was fun
figuring out what would happen when a creature like this encountered an open space where gravity
could take over, meaning a creature like that had never felt the force of gravity before. Right,
which of course a fish wouldn't have either, and I may possibly have considered intelligent
fish when I was planning that story, but as I say, it was so long ago now I don't really remember.
This was 27 years ago, I don't recall. You wrote most of your short stories early on, didn't you?
Yes, it's been a hobby all along, and in the last few years there somehow seems to have been less
and less time. I've been doing more work connected with my profession of high school science teaching.
I'm currently president-elect of the Knowing and Association of Chemistry Teachers, and I have an
awful feeling that's going to take a lot of my time for the next two and a half years.
Yes, it sounds like that might take up a lot of your time. I find Needle one of your most
fascinating books. It's been said by whom I don't know that a good science fiction mystery could not
be written. John Campbell used to make that claim, and I suspect that Needle was written at least
partly to try to prove John wrong. When it was coming out as a cereal, he made one of his trips
to the Greater Boston area. The first of the two parts of the cereal was on the stands then,
and he began to talk about it to an MIT audience, got a loud scream of, don't give the solution away.
He admitted that he was wrong about science fiction mysteries not being possible.
The detective in the Needle is a symbiot living in its host body.
Where did you come up with that, dear? It's really a unique idea.
Well, the idea is really not very new. The basic notion of what you might call possession has been
part of the human mythology probably since long before we learned to write, and many science
fiction stories prior to Needle had had this, that, or the other sort of creature entering the human
body and doing various things. The one I can remember most vividly was by Nathan Shockner,
two-part cereal called Infra Universe, which appeared in the December 1936, January 1937,
issues of astounding stories. One reason that I, that good in the memory is I have the December
36 astounding open in front of me at the moment. At the moment, I've been reading old collection
stuff, and that had virus-like creatures moving into the human body and taking control. Again,
I was more materialistic. I didn't think that such a creature could take over as easily as was
suggested in some of these stories, and I felt that the hunter would have to have to do quite a
job of work before he had any real effect of communication to say nothing of control in his
host. Yes, and all the time I was reading the Needle, I was wondering why doesn't he vibrate
his ear, and then that's what you have him do in the sequel. Eventually, yes, the idea has worked out.
Well, I have to admit that that idea didn't occur to me until later.
I will just have to admit that it didn't occur to the hunter either.
Yes, well, both you and the hunter probably think along the same lines.
Yes, I'm not the sort of craftsman who can come up with a personality totally different from my own
and make it sound believable. There are people who are much better at that art than I am.
Robert Heinlein, for example, can write Stranger in a Strange Land, become practically a god to the
hippies, and then write Starship Trooper and have everybody thinking he's a Nazi. And this,
in my opinion, neither of them reflects his own beliefs, he simply shows his skill at the character
portrayal. I can't do that. I can't come close to it. No, but you do have some of the best aliens
I've ever read. Do you have any authors that you think put together good aliens?
Well, my favorite, I think, is Paul Anderson. He's done a good deal of this sort of thing, too. We have
worked together to a certain extent. We collaborated by mail in putting together the planetary system
in which his novel Fire Time took place. I supposedly have rights to a few planets in the
same system, and if time ever permits, I may write some stories about them.
Aside from aliens in particular, do you have any authors whom you think are writing good, hard
science? Well, Paul still comes to mind, first of all. Arthur Clark, of course, knows his
relevant space science very thoroughly, and he doesn't do silly things like having spaceships
fall into the sun when their engines quit. Isaac Asimov, although he doesn't write very much
science fiction now, seldom makes really serious science mistakes in it. A lot of the new writers,
I'm sorry to say, I can't cite my name. Several of them are pretty good, but my memory for names
is terrible, and it's the start of the school year, and I'm currently trying to learn the names
of about 75 students of my own. Back to the subject of aliens again, do you think anybody's ever put
together a good alien for the movies? I haven't seen by any means all of the movie science fiction
things. The one that was called alien, I gather, was very impressive, but was so mostly by avoiding
detailed portrayal of his or its or her nature, which of course is a perfectly good trick.
I can't think of any alien I have seen in a movie who was really believable in character,
believably alien. Now, what was his name, Yoder, or something like that, and the empire strikes back,
was funny and good as far as, I guess, as he went. Who else?
Now, that's pretty well. That's the only one I can think of who was very impressive. There were
several unnamed species in the bar scene in the first of the shows, the Star Wars, where
the disguise was good, the arguing back and forth in a completely unintelligible language
produced a very impressive and funny scene. But again, you can't really tell what the personalities
of the creatures were like. They're very much like drunks in a terrestrial bar. I think a good
job was done, but I wouldn't say they were really alien. And what do you, I don't know,
what can be done? The movie, the visual field, either movies or TV, represents quite a different
problem from the writing one. And I know just enough about it to realize what the difference is.
I would question my own ability to write a good TV script or a movie script,
because you are depending a great deal on what the customer sees, rather than on the words you can
use, the paragraphs you can build to explain what the background situation is. I don't know how that
problem is solved, really. Possibly with a lot of money. Well, that certainly helped.
But I don't think money is the whole answer to a problem like that. You need somebody who
has not merely an imagination, but a skill in the field. He has to have experience. He has to
have knowledge, which I think probably can only come from experience, of what those visual
media can and can't do, and in what ways practically they differ from the written word. And here I'm
quite aware of my own limitations, and I shouldn't even try to tell what those differences are,
because most of them I probably don't even recognize. Yes, I see what you mean now.
In your current book, The Nitrogen Fix, how did you come up with the idea about the oxygen being
gone from the Earth's atmosphere, or at least bonded with nitrogen? That's right. The idea itself
is not no. It was used many years ago in a story called The Mightiest Machine by John Campbell,
which someone invented a catalyst which permitted the direct combination of nitrogen and oxygen to
nitrogen and dioxide. Actually, such a catalyst wouldn't work, apparently.
Nearly as I've been able to figure out from the available free energies concerned.
But with a little juggling and having life forms involved, which can balance off the
decrease in free, the increase in free energy in one place with a decrease in another,
it seemed possible to me. Also, again, I was more careful quantitatively that John was. He had the
snowflakes of nitrogen and dioxide drifting out of the sky and bursting into flame as they hit
organic matter and oxidized it. The red-brown gases that rose when the high oxides of nitrogen got
reduced by other things like organics and the streams fuming as the oxides of nitrogen
boiled into them. There's a very impressive book, beautiful adventure story,
but unfortunately there isn't that much oxygen in the air as in the atmosphere. You couldn't have
made that much nitrogen and dioxide. And I had to tone everything down a good deal and have the
worst of it have happened in the past and try to figure out what the final results would have been,
or intermediate results anyway, a couple of thousand years after things had started.
But I'd been working on that quantitatively for a long time because I can remember giving a talk
on the general subject to a local college somewhere about the winter of 1958-59.
Oh, I see. You've been working on the basic outline of this book for a long time.
Yes, indeed.
Are you working on anything new right now?
Only in the sense that whenever I think of some idea which might be useful, I stick it on a three
by five card and put it where I can find it again. When the pile of cards gets high enough,
I start spreading it out and seeing if they can be put into any sort of rational sequence.
School has just started in the last couple of weeks and I really haven't time to do very much
of that for a while. Won't have for a few months. I won't have time. Well, Christmas vacation will
be the first time I can do very much on that line.
The works of Hal Clement and others who write hard science fiction are truer to the appellation
science fiction than many others who write in the genre. Fiction that is not said in either our
present or the known past can easily become unrealistic. But with the governing effect of
scientific background, the fantasies of the future are given plausibility.
Perhaps this combination of fantasy and plausibility is what draws so many humans
to the imperian realms of science fiction.
This is David Cruz.
And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.